<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="division">
			<section id="chapter-3-29" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How when tribulation cometh we must call upon and bless God.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Blessed be thy name, O Lord, for evermore, who hast willed this temptation and trouble to come upon me. I cannot escape it, but have need to flee unto Thee, that Thou mayest succour me and turn it unto me for good. Lord, now am I in tribulation, and it is not well within my heart, but I am sore vexed by the suffering which lieth upon me. And now, O dear Father, what shall I say? I am taken among the snares. “Save me from this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> that Thou mightest be glorified when I am deeply humbled and am delivered through Thee. “Let it be Thy pleasure to deliver me;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> for what can I do who am poor, and without Thee whither shall I go? Give patience this time also. Help me, O Lord my God, and I will not fear how much soever I be weighed down.</p>
				<p>And now amid these things what shall I say? Lord, Thy will be done. I have well deserved to be troubled and weighed down. Therefore I ought to bear, would that it be with patience, until the tempest be overpast and comfort return. Yet is Thine omnipotent arm able also to take this temptation away from me, and to lessen its power that I fall not utterly under it, even as many a time past thou has helped me, O God, my merciful God. And as much as this deliverance is difficult to me, so much is it easy to Thee, O right hand of the most Highest.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
